***Fandry is not TImePass***
‘Fandry’ is a story of power dynamics through the failure of love and imagination. Fandry shows an innocent love of ‘Jabya’ (Somnath Avaghad) but at the same time it also simultaneously explores the multi-layered hierarchy of the evil Indian Society. In the movie, ‘Jabya’ is a lower caste boy and ‘Shalu’ (Rajeshwari Kharat) is an upper caste girl. Being a set in rural area of Maharashtra, the ‘societal norms’ which are traditionally passed down from the ‘Manusmriti’ are of a peculiarly rigid nature. ‘Fandry’ is the face of teenage love, dreaming and facing the harsh truth in such a rigid caste system. The movie was already very conferring in various platforms of the society. Apart from Kishor Kadam, everyone is new in movie and the treatment that they have offered is of a different substance. We can see these things from his proposed style. Although Fandry is a representative story, but it can easily relate to anyone who is ignored and belongs to a marginalized or oppressed group

Catching the black sparrow is the theme of the movie. It is referring to a superstition in rural Maharashtra that if you catch a black sparrow and burn it, the ashes of it if thrown on a beloved then she or he only think about you. The ashes are supposed to caste a spell.

● This movie rightly discusses the theme of education in Indian society. ● Villagers think that lower caste people are not allowed to educate themselves. ● Jabya, the hero of a film, is somehow clever in the study. But due to the traditional attitude towards the education of his parents, he misses school and attends the work allotted by his father. ● Lack of education also gives birth to superstition.
Even though the teacher recited a poem against discrimination, the students were reluctant and didn’t bother. ● The school also had a lot of pictures of social reformers like Dr. B.R.Ambedkar and Savitribai Phule. ● The whole act of mocking also took place in front of the school, symbolizing the harsh truth of ignorant Indian society. ● It made us think that education doesn’t necessarily ensure sensibility.

	
